ABOUT PYTHAGORAS AND NUMEROLOGY.
In the book Change your life with πumerology (stylization of Change your life with numerology) – a derivative work of The Complete Book of Numerology (1980) of David A. Phillips written by Youtuber Lê Đỗ Quỳnh Hương. In the copyright page of the book, which was separated from and preceding the preface, the follows was stated:
“All the information provided in this project is strictly for reference only and does not guarantee accuracy in all cases. None of the people working on this project shall be held responsible for any of the readers’ attempts to use any of the information provided here to their advantage.” And that’s rather ironic, considering that the author’s big idea with this work was to help you Change your life with numerology (*in quotation mark).
But what concerned me even more was the author’s following statement in Part 1 of this book: Numerology is a Self-Discovery Science”. As far as we know, the said Self-Discovery Science cannot be found anywhere in the academic science system of the world: there simply doesn’t exist a branch of science under that name.
On Goodreads, the world’s largest review-by-reader website, the large majority of readers put David A. Phillips’ said work under the categories of Pseudoscience (literally counterfeit science, or science look-alike) and Spirituality (superstition) [1]. The field discussed (by both David’s original and the derivative work in Vietnamese) – numerology – has also long been identified as pseudoscience [2]. 
So, to not waste any more time of the reader, we’ll go straight to the point: numerology is strictly a pseudoscience when the canonical definition of science is considered [3]. And for that reason, calling numerology a science can be deemed either as a misinformed statement, or a deliberate attempt to mislead casual readers.
The next part of this article will be dedicated to a comprehensive, in-depth analysis on the history of numerology and on the great man (self-)proclaimed by numerology as the founding father of the field – Pythagoras, in order to help the readers to attain a better understanding of what numerology is at its very core, and what have spurred the scientific world to consider it a pseudoscience. We will cut ourselves some slack by not going too deep in analyzing in specific the ideas that were given in these books, and pointing out why they are wrong. Because it is a general consensus in the scientific world that this field has never been able to prove its theories scientifically right (meaning that none of them were proven by scientific methods); overall, numerology is just a system of beliefs cleverly phrased and arranged to make them look more appealing to the public – which is the case for most popular pseudosciences generally.
1. Pythagoras.
So the most concrete foothold, which is cited so often by the followers of numerology, for their belief that numerology is a science, is the name of the man who (as they claimed) founded this field – the great Greek philosopher and mathematician Pythagoras. But, interestingly enough, even the mathematician himself, whose name become famous for his discovery of the famed Pythagorean theorem, is currently under as the academia has actually started to question his contributions to mathematics as a science; in fact, debates have been sparked around whether or not Pythagoras should be credited as the one to have proved the theorem on the right triangle that was named after him.
And, in fact, even the man’s existence is currently under question: did the man called Pythagoras really exist in history?
As absurd as this question sounds, it is actually the case that have never found any evidence or any reasoning concrete enough to prove that the man called Pythagoras actually existed. The hypothesis that Pythagoras had never existed, while has not yet gained so much ground to be declared as the truth, had already found some of it, enough for it to be just as reliable as the belief that he existed.
What caused this situation is the fact that, unlike any of the fellow great minds from his time, Pythagoras didn’t leave any work, material or any kind of autograph whatsoever. None of the fellow Greek scholars at his time had ever mentioned him either [4]. What’s more, the works to mention Pythagoras’s name actually dated hundreds of years after his claimed death. And even in the instances where he was mentioned in literary works, the descriptions of the man were actually very conflicting, fragmented and full of legends. His earliest appearance in these works are often short, vague and even characterized with hints of sarcasm and ridicule [5].
In some records, such as that of Aristotle or Abaris the Hyperborean, Pythagoras was actually referred to as Apollo himself, or at least his incarnation [6]. Pythagoras was also famous for his role of founding the religious sect (?!) of Pythagoreanism, whose principles revolved around mathematics, cosmology and the belief on cyclicality of life (which shed a relatively novel and positive color on death). For that reason, many scholars hypothesized that Pythagoras was an imaginary figurehead built up and made famous by by the cult’s later followers and they, in the process of doing so, credited him with various collective achievements of the group – which has already been known to happen a lot in history.
But despite that, the most heated (and perhaps the most crucial) debate around Pythagoras was actually not about whether or not he was a real person, but instead was about whether or not he was the person responsible for the great contributions to mathematics and cosmology that was credited to his name. And the answer for that question from the academia is leaning toward “No”, and especially so for the famed theorem of “the total of the squared length of two sides of right triangle equals the squared length of the hypotenuse”, as the general consensus is overwhelmingly leaning toward him not being the said theorem’s creator [7].
For example, while Plato and Aristotle did finally mention Pythagoras much later after his time, they never mentioned any of his ideas on cosmology, and that is very bizarre given if those ideas were so popular in his time as claimed in the records from even later times. The records from the time also shared a great devoid of any mention of the contributions of Pythagoras in the field of mathematics, specifically the famous theorem of geometry that was named after him. Again this is incredibly odd, as in modern time the said theorem was the most frequently recited, reproved and relearned of all time [8].
Dicaearchus, a student of Aristotle, who was also a scholar extremely dedicated in his passion of recording the history and geography of Greece, also had never mentioned any of Pythagoras’s great achievements, and this the words he had about the man: “No one knew for sure what he actually said to his followers” [9]. The records on Pythagoras’s achievements made by other students of Aristotle on the history of mathematics also shared the same vagueness, with hardly any specific trace of any of Pythagoras’s contributions in the field of geometry. The bizarre lack of presence of Pythagoras as well as the theorem named after him in any of the records of these prestigious and accredited historians has sparked doubt even among the most loyal admirers of Pythagoras in academia. And if it hasn’t been absurd enough that Pythagoras’s life as well as the religious sect founded by him might actually had a much looser connection with mathematics as claimed, even the claim that Pythagoras was the founder of that borderline-a-cult of a religious sect might actually be a lie after all, as the first recorded member of the said religious sect – the genius mathematician Archytas – lived in a time centuries after than Pythagoras’s death [9].
While most historical evidences never mentioned as much about Pythagoras or, more importantly, any of his achievement, there was some very slight hint of his appearance, like how 2 undated poem lines mentioned the event of Pythagoras sacrificed an oxen to celebrate his discovering a famous diagram. This has led to the hypothesis that Pythagoras accidently learned the theorem of the right triangle from the ruins of ancient Babylon, as lots of evidence suggested that the Babylonians had discovered the said theorem thousands of years before the man was even born [10].
So, overall, the debates around Pythagoras among the modern scholars have yet to come to an end. However, the currently most accepted opinion in the community was that Pythagoras was neither a mathematician nor a scientist [11]. And  despite how his entire history was completely in the dark and how historical evidence overwhelmingly contradicted his case, for a long time Pythagoras was still always hailed as an excelled anyway as the accomplisher of lots of achievements in mathematics.
The Pythagorean theorem was quite a wonder given how short, simple and yet complete it was. So much it had inspired in some people the idea that the truth of the universe could actually be packed in a bunch of numbers and mathematical rules. And it certainly seems to be a theme for Pythagoras and the cult founded by him, as they started to assign meanings like the truth and the messages of the universe to any number they discover in daily life. And Numerology was the product of that.
Aristoxenus, another student Aristotle, in one of the extremely rare quotes that actually mentioned both Pythagoras and mathematics in it, said the follows: “they revered numbers and tried to separate them from more mundane purposes like trading, by comparing every things in life with numbers” [12]. So, generally, Pythagoras’s approach with the number wasn’t that of a mathematician or a scientist of any kind, but instead as a kind of methodology that relies on numbers to evaluate everything that happens in life.
You will find a brief summary of the debate around Pythagoras, where it started and where it currently stands in the link to Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy which we will provide in the comment section.
2. Numerology.
(We will refrain from the Vietnamese translated version of the definition because both popularly accepted Vietnamese definitions of the said belief, namely ‘thần số học’ and ‘nhân số học’ were coined by the organizations who actively tried to import this belief to Vietnam (and had great monetary incentives to reinvent the said definition), which was in fact quite far off from the official definition).
Whether numerology was developed by Pythagoras himself or later by the cult that founded in fact still currently remains under debate. But even without that issue being considered, numerology has never been taken highly of ever since it first appeared. And even in its modern form, numerology is still having a severe case of “identity” crisis, as lots and lots of readers have complained about how the principles given in numerology books can literally “vary by each author”, who seem to each have their own way to interpret the meaning behind the numbers. Perhaps as the numbers didn’t contain any kind of meaning whatsoever and the authors have to make up those meanings by themselves, they certainly felt the incentives to take the liberty to add as much as possible the ear-pleasing interpretations that may attract them some customers.
By dictionary definition, numerology is any belief in the divine or mystical relationship between a number and one or more coinciding events. So even its official definition by the dictionary has already reflected what the world has to say about numerology’s qualification as a science (short answer: it’s not), so it is just absurd to have some people either deliberately (or get fooled into) calling it a science.
In his work Metaphysics, Aristotle said the following: “The so-called Pythagoreans, who were the first to take up mathematics, not only advanced this subject, but saturated with it, they fancied that the principles of mathematics were the principles of all things”. According to him, the followers of Pythagoreanism practiced mathematics purely for mystical purposes, without any thought of using it for any practical purpose. And for that reason, the mathematics practiced by those people is simply something very different and should not be mistaken with the mathematics that we study nowadays; it could very likely be, from the very beginning of it, a practice of assigning numbers to literally everything there is and then imagine that there’s some kind of mystical connection between those things that were represented by the connections between the numbers they are assigned with.
And the principle they used in doing is a rather primitive one at that. As elaborated by (a portion of) the Pythagoreanism’s theories, the number 1 is the origin of all things because you can literally create any other number from 1, like how 9 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1. The number 2 represents females and the number 3 represents males, so number 5 represents marriage and family (2 + 3 = 5). Number 4 represents justice. And number 10 represents completion as it’s the total of the said numbers 10 = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4. From this, we can see that the numerology principles employ very little mathematics, predominantly natural numbers and simple arithmetic operations like addition [13].  Only the other hand, the basal theories like “Number 1 represents the origin of all things, number 2 represent matters”, “odd numbers are masculine”, “even numbers are feminine”, “Number 7 is the sacred number because it’s the number of planets in the solar system and the number of strings on the lyre, as well as the birthday of Apollo”, … do not differ so much in nature from the number-related superstitions in of Asian cultures like “males have 7 astral bodies, females have 9”, etc. 
In fact, number mysticism, as the practice of assigning numbers to everything in the world, is actually quite popular and exists in in pretty much every cultures and religions, though in different forms, like in China (lucky numbers, unlucky numbers, traditional medicine …), in India, in Judaism, in biblical numerology, etc. They might actually look hot and trendy for a little while in a time when the humankind’s understanding of mathematics as well as of the world was still crude and limited. But most of that had been discontinued since long ago and even if some of them somehow still remained in existence, it’s a very scanty one at that. Even in the past, they never really made it out of the scale of small cults, and was never well-received by academia in any age. For example, Christianity in the past had constantly condemned the Babylonian and Pythagorean numerologies, categorizing numerology as well as other types of fortune-telling and astrology as heretical mysticism and forbade though practices; but somehow these practices survived in some small groups as they somehow deemed that there might be some sort of connections between numbers and the bible and decided to dedicate to finding connections.
From science’s perspective, numerology was never an object of interest. No scientific studies were able to prove that practicing numerology can be beneficial for your life, nor were they able to prove any kind of mystical relationship between the numbers and anything, or between anything in general. For that reason, numerology’s scientific value is absolute zero and nobody builds their scientific theories using numerology as basis, or even cite numerology at all in their studies. The term “numerology” is actually used among scientists as an insiders’ insult for scientific theories that seem to get baited too hard by data coincidence. Instead of seeing data coincidence as random happenstance, some scientists simply get completely fascinated by the ‘patterns’ drawn by the false data, and end up drawing some hasty and convenient conclusions (like some kind of mysterious, unexplained connection between one variable and another, for example) based on some lazy, thoughtless cause-and-effect speculation, while ignoring exceptions and procedures designed to prevent that kind of mistake. So those theories are labeled as numerology and will simply get ignored by the community, and whoever produces one of these theories would definitely see it as taint to his name [14]. But even then, this kind of issue simply doesn’t occur so often and thus doesn’t receive as much attention from the scientific community.
Numerology does not contain even a slightest hint of science in it, and in fact has never even been considered as a widely-recognized, legit field of practice; that’s the truth for sure. But then, if you ask me whether or not that would take away every odd for numerology to be correct in the end, then the answer is actually no, technically. It is true that things do not need to be scientifically proved or to be widely recognized to be true in the end. But then this piece of wisdom is actually quite …meaningless, especially from the perspective of science doers and believers (which I assume most of us are). While it’s true that we cannot use science to prove that numerology is wrong, the same is true for fairy tales or the existence of gods: The frame of reference used to sustain those concepts are not the same with those used to sustain science, namely logic, evidence and system of scientific knowledge. And as these ideas are not science and don’t follow the principles of science, it doesn’t need a scientific methodology to sustain itself.
But then it is still important to know that numerology is something entirely different from any scientific theories that exist in the world, because as numerology doesn’t establish for itself a strong theoretical basis, while it cannot be proven wrong, there is also no basis whatsoever to believe that it is right, except blind faith.
3. So is there any way for numerology to be of value?
Learning about numerology can be a way for us to learn more about how humankind was in the past. Sometimes we have to look into the way how the people from a certain period thought and rationalize in order to understand what kind of life they lived. Relying entirely on modern day’s scientific thinking can also tunnel our vision and cause us to see only what we expected to see in the past, while missing out things that only the people living at the time might be able to see, and thus fail in finding a comprehensive picture of the past. To actually understand how a farmer living 1000 years ago felt and thought, we have to understand what he knew, and what he didn’t know. The mystical aspect of legends and fairy tales can partially tell us how humankind saw the world in the past; and we should study those ideas with utmost diligence if we wish to truly understand our ancestors. And this was certainly never an easy task; it’s something that should be handled by experts from some very specialized discipline dedicated to such studies, not by a bunch of casual people who wish to earn themselves some luck in life from doing them.
In addition, looking into numerology can also be helpful as a form of training for you to better understand the hidden messages of the authors, especially in creative works of popular culture. The presence of numbers (and their hidden meanings) in popular culture works is nowadays considered one of the premium types of Easter eggs. The numbers have always been used as a symbol and assigned with lots and lots of layers of meaning through thousands of years of history. By dedicating enough effort to study it, the creators may find themselves a lot of materials for their creation, as they can hide numbers and hence the bottled messages every here and there in their work without dedicating too much screen time for those auxiliary features.
For example, the number 3 has always been assigned with lots of mystical and spiritual meaning, and always presented in lots of folklores, like the 3 piglets, the 3 bears, the 3 wishes, etc. 3 is also the number of supreme deities in a lot of culture, like the trio Anu, Bel and Ea of Babylonian culture; the 3 forms of the Egyptian God of Sun - Khepri, Re and Atum; the God Trinity of Christianity, the sacrifice of 3 black cats to summon demons … Or, for example, number 9 represents sorrow and suffering. Number 12 represents heaven and good things, while the number 11 represents the negative side of it as it’s an incomplete version of number 12… [15].
So by spending some time to study numerology, sometimes you would be able to see hidden messages of the authors in their works, and even the level of competency of those authors in utilizing those ancient materials, to see who’s the master, who’s the novice and who probably didn’t have any idea on how to do it properly. But other than that numerology hardly has any other us: you can’t summon gods of fortune or demons with it, nor can you use it in any meaningful way to help with your in-real-life problems either. The most useful application of numerology as a medium for modern humans to better understand their ancestors, ironically, is also taking away more and more of the undiscovered zone that the modern followers of this field could use a foothold for their faith in its mystical power.
Back with the book we mentioned at the beginning, I took a quick look through it and, unsurprisingly enough, there wasn’t anything particularly innovative or novel written in it. It’s not much more than a lengthier and glorified version of the series of articles on numerology on Mực Tím magazine around ten years ago, that certainly were dedicated for teenage audiences. While those contents were not provided particularly out of good- or ill-will, they certainly weren’t harmless either. While dressing itself with a positive outlook, the book chose to find its basis in a very unsustainable practice. Just the act of (falsely) calling numerology a science alone can already be extremely toxic, as it may mislead some of the less cautious readers into believing that some of these mystical practices share the same credibility as that of science, and in turns hurt the reputation of science in multiple ways. 
Unlike the more native and traditional superstitions preexisted in Vietnamese history like fortune telling, horoscope, … which were never expected to be since in the first place; numerology as well as some other pseudosciences are being labeled as science by the people who are trying to bring it in the country; they are trying to market it as some kind of cutting-edge scientific philosophy that works like magic (even though the numerology fad had already met it makers in more developed part of the world 20-30 years ago). And we feel that we have the responsibility to raise the alarm.
As readers, it is your right to choose what information you wish to accept for yourself; that would always be the case. But then it would be so much better if all the information out there is presented truthfully.